== ARTICLE TITLE ==
Secondary exposure to organophosphate in the emergency department: analysis of an incident

== INTRODUCTION ==

Organophosphate (OP) insecticide poisoning is a rare occurrence in non-agricultural countries like Singapore. The risks of secondary exposure among healthcare workers (HCWs) attending to patients with OP poisoning have been described in several case series.[1234] However, most reports did not include serum cholinesterase measurements to confirm whether the patients were indeed poisoned. We describe an incident of secondary exposure of HCWs to a patient who was admitted to the emergency department (ED) for maldison poisoning from an insecticide containing 500 g/L malathion dissolved in a 487 g/L hydrocarbon solvent. We also report the measurements of the cholinesterase levels of both the index patient and the affected HCWs.

== METHODS ==

A post-incident investigation was carried out as part of mandatory risk management reporting. Staff involved were identified from the roster assignments on the day of the incident. Consent was taken before enrolment to the study. All staff present during the incident reported the extent of contact with the index case, the duration of exposure, and the timing and nature of their symptoms. A retrospective review of the medical records of the index patient and the affected HCWs who presented to the ED was conducted to elucidate their treatment, disposition and cholinesterase levels. This study was approved by Institutional Review Board at SingHealth, Singapore (CIRB reference no. 2020/2165).

== RESULTS ==

== Index patient ==

A middle-aged man presented to the ED for OP ingestion. He was found at home foaming at the mouth lying next to a 100-mL bottle of insecticide, along with alcohol. Paramedics found him drowsy and diaphoretic, and he was conveyed via ambulance to the nearest hospital. The patient was wheeled directly into the ED resuscitation room, which was located within an enclosed, air-conditioned indoor area. The paramedics had brought along the bottle of the ingested agent (Horti-on insecticide – 500 g/L maldison, an anticholinesterase compound, and solvent 487 g/L liquid hydrocarbon). The patient had a heart rate of 152 bpm, blood pressure of 149/100 mmHg, respiratory rate of 20 bpm and an oxygen saturation of 100% on non-rebreather mask. He was unconscious and diaphoretic with pinpoint pupils, and his clothing was soaked in vomitus. A decision was made for emergency intubation to promptly secure his airway. Thereafter, the hazardous material (HAZMAT) decontamination unit (HDU) located outdoors and adjacent to the resuscitation zone was activated. The patient’s clothing was removed, bagged, sealed and discarded in biohazard bins, and the patient’s skin was washed thoroughly using liquid soap and running water following the hospital decontamination protocol.[5] A chemical agent detector was used to ensure that the patient was washed free of the toxic agent before further resuscitation efforts were continued. Meanwhile, the toxicologist on-call was consulted, and treatment with pralidoxime (two 1-g doses over 30 min) and atropine (2.4 mg followed by 4.8 mg infusion) was initiated for the patient. Propofol and fentanyl infusions were used for post-intubation sedation and analgesia, and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for further management. Serum cholinesterase level taken on the day of ingestion was < 1000 U/mL and remained low until Day 5, when it increased to 1169 U/mL. Red blood cell (RBC) cholinesterase was 3221 U/mL [Figure 1]. He was extubated successfully on Day 4 after further treatment with pralidoxime and atropine and was moved to the high dependency unit for the next 3 days. He recovered uneventfully in the general ward for one more day before discharge in full recovery.

== Secondary exposure among HCWs ==

Three paramedics conveyed the index patient to the hospital. No primary decontamination was conducted at the scene. Dressed in short-sleeved uniforms, surgical gloves and masks, the paramedics attended to the patient for approximately 30 min, suctioned the patient’s oral secretions and carried the patient, whose clothing was drenched in vomitus, onto the stretcher. They reported an overwhelming odour of the insecticide during transport, for which they had to open the windows of the vehicle for better ventilation. One paramedic developed nausea during conveyance and started vomiting soon after arrival at the ED. The second paramedic, who was also at the back of the ambulance, developed giddiness and vomiting about 15 min after arrival. The ambulance driver reported headache and giddiness thereafter. All the paramedics underwent decontamination at the HDU.

The resuscitation team managing the index case consisted of three doctors (a senior emergency specialist, a senior resident and a clinical associate) and four nurses. All of them were dressed in short-sleeved scrubs, surgical masks and gloves when they received and intubated the patient within the enclosed resuscitation room. Only after the patient was decontaminated did they don disposable isolation gowns. The duration of exposure was approximately 15 min from arrival to decontamination of the casualty. The four resuscitation nurses, who reported ill, had more prolonged exposure to the patient compared to the doctors. An additional nursing staff was called upon to care for the patient in the resuscitation room post-decontamination. He had donned a disposable long-sleeved gown over his scrubs, gloves and N95 mask while attending to the patient and reported light-headedness afterwards.

The HDU team consisted of three nurses who were in full HAZMAT suits (Paul Boyle Technologies CLD500 fully encapsulated overall with powered air purifying respirator) during the decontamination process. They too sought medical treatment shortly after attending to the index patient and paramedics, despite being adequately protected throughout patient contact. Table 1 summarises the details of the patient encounter, extent of exposure and symptoms of the HCWs who sought medical treatment at the ED during the incident.

Altogether, 14 HCWs developed symptoms soon after contact with the index patient, with 12 seeking medical attention in the ED. The two staff who declined to be assessed had spontaneous resolution of symptoms. Staff attrition rate was 14.7% (9/61) among ED doctors and nurses on that afternoon shift. Reported symptoms [Table 1] included sore throat (n = 1), watery eyes (n = 2), headache (n = 2), giddiness (n = 4), light-headedness (n = 5), nausea (n = 1) and vomiting (n = 2). No HCWs displayed typical OP poisoning toxidrome, such as excessive secretions, narrowed pupils or diarrhoea. The ED staff who had no direct contact with the index patient did not report any symptoms. Severity and time of symptom onset appeared to correlate with the duration and extent of exposure to the patient. Risk assessment of the exposed HCWs was carried out by the attending physician in consultation with the toxicologist on-call.

The eight HCWs (three paramedics and five nurses) who attended to the index patient before decontamination had potential dermal and inhalational exposure, and were deemed at moderate risk. The three paramedics underwent decontamination at HDU, while all the affected nurses were asked to shower and change their uniforms. A single dose of DuoDote autoinjector (2.1 mg atropine/600 mg pralidoxime chloride) was administered to one of the paramedics who experienced severe giddiness and vomiting in the ED based on suspicion of secondary OP poisoning. The other seven HCWs were treated symptomatically. The HCWs in the moderate-risk group had serum cholinesterase and RBC acetylcholinesterase levels measured and were admitted to the ED observational unit. None showed significant reduction in measured enzyme levels, and all were discharged well after 8 h of observation.

Four nurses (three HDU and one resuscitation) who attended to the patient with appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) reported non-specific symptoms. They were assessed clinically and deemed to be at low risk. As their vital signs and physical examinations were normal, blood investigations were not required. They were discharged with outpatient medical leave. All symptomatic HCWs, including the two doctors who did not seek medical attention, reported complete resolution of symptoms on follow-up.

== DISCUSSION ==

Organophosphate agents comprise a heterogeneous family of over 50,000 compounds. They can be found in pesticides (e.g. malathion), medications (e.g. neostigmine), commercial chemicals (e.g. lubricants) and nerve agents meant for chemical warfare (e.g. sarin).[6] In developing nations, widespread OP pesticide use in agriculture has reportedly led to many cases of intentional and non-intentional poisoning through dermal, inhalational, oral and, rarely, intravenous routes.[6] The World Health Organization (WHO) gives an estimate of 3 million cases of pesticide poisoning annually worldwide, resulting in an excess of 250,000 deaths per annum.[7]

Organophosphate compounds bind and irreversibly inhibit several enzymes, including RBC/synaptic acetylcholinesterase and serum cholinesterase. Acetylcholinesterase inhibition leads to acetylcholine accumulation at the nerve synapses and neuromuscular junctions, receptor overstimulation and paralysis of cholinergic synaptic transmission. Signs of OP poisoning are secondary to overstimulation of the muscarinic, nicotinic and central nervous system receptors. Muscarinic effects include miosis, bradycardia and overstimulation of bronchial glands. Nicotinic effects include muscle fasciculations and flaccid paralysis. The onset and severity of symptoms depend on the specific compound, amount, route of exposure and rate of metabolic degradation. Without medical intervention, severe poisoning leads to lethal respiratory failure.[89] Treatment for OP nerve agent includes three types of therapies: antimuscarinic, oxime and anticonvulsant. The antimuscarinic drug, atropine, is a key component of treatment.[10] Some OP pesticides, such as the one ingested by our index patient, contain hydrocarbon solvents, which are volatile and cause gastrointestinal symptoms as well as giddiness and headache when inhaled.[11]

The actual risk of secondary poisoning among HCWs through nosocomial exposure is uncertain, as it would be unethical to conduct randomised controlled trials on human subjects to study this risk. Evidence from several reported incidents are not robust enough to make firm conclusions.[1234] One reported incident of nosocomial exposure to a patient who ingested a veterinary insecticide concentrate comprising naphthalene, xylene and phosmet resulted in severe symptoms in three HCWs. One required intubation and intensive care unit admission. In this incident, decontamination was not performed on the index case, the staff were not wearing adequate PPE and cholinesterase levels were not assayed.[2] In another report, two individuals developed symptoms after performing mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on an OP-poisoned friend in the prehospital setting. The index patient died in the ED despite resuscitative efforts. Both first aiders were treated with atropine and pralidoxime, but their cholinesterase levels were not assayed.[4] Only one report included the cholinesterase levels of 14 symptomatic HCWs after nosocomial exposure to a patient with lethal malathion overdose without adequate PPE. Blood investigations showed no systemic OP poisoning among the HCWs.[1] The lack of reporting of nosocomial poisoning in countries where HCWs often tend to patients with suicidal ingestion of OP pesticide without adequate PPE suggests that the risk may be low.[12]

Acute dermal and inhalational exposure to pesticides may carry minimal risk for OP poisoning, given that OP compounds, being effective pesticides, have extremely low volatility. However, most OP pesticide formulations also contain a hydrocarbon solvent that is highly volatile and more likely to cause symptoms upon inhalation.[12] Nevertheless, safeguards against both acute and chronic occupational exposure are still widely recommended. In the agricultural setting, the WHO guidelines recommend various safety measures when dealing with pesticides, including the use of long-sleeved shirts, long trousers, boots, socks and chemical-resistant gloves.[13] In Singapore, legislation mandates six-monthly medical examinations to monitor clinical symptoms and RBC acetylcholinesterase levels for factory workers handling OPs. Plasma cholinesterase estimations are recommended only in acute OP overexposure.[14]

HAZMAT incidents are rare, and this incident provides an opportunistic insight into the potential consequences of secondary exposures during a crisis. Fortunately, this case involved an OP with limited transmissibility. It provides further evidence that the actual risk of OP pesticide poisoning through dermal and inhalational routes during nosocomial exposure is low. Reported symptoms and cholinesterase levels did not indicate systemic OP poisoning. Symptoms may instead be due to hydrocarbon inhalation, mild localised OP poisoning or the side effects of donning HAZMAT suits. The environment within the HAZMAT suit contains air filtered by the canister on the air purifying respirator, which removes chemical contaminants from the ambient environment and pumps it into the suit. This is an active process creating positive pressure within the suit with a one-way flow. The canisters also have a lifespan of several hours before breakthrough, and as such, there is low likelihood of entry or build-up of chemicals within the suit and recirculation. However, wearers may develop non-specific symptoms from heat- or confinement-related effects.

Furthermore, the impact of psychological stress reactions during HAZMAT incidents should not be underestimated and needs to be dealt with expeditiously to avoid closure of EDs during disasters.[3] During this incident, the ED staff attrition rate was 14.7% [Table 2]. Studies have shown quantifiable impact of perceived risk with symptomatology.[1516]

The safety of HCWs and healthcare facility integrity are critical issues that need to be addressed to allow continuity of care during a HAZMAT incident.[17] Emergency department preparedness and staff training are essential. Taking various factors into account, it is essential to minimise nosocomial exposure with prompt decontamination and standard precautions. In managing a case of OP poisoning, for instance, appropriate skin and respiratory protective equipment should be worn. Any inadvertent skin contamination should be washed immediately. The index patient should be attended to in a well-ventilated area when possible.[12] These steps not only mitigate the risk of actual secondary poisoning, but may also contribute to the psychological well-being of HCWs involved.

Exposure to nerve agents is particularly concerning, as they are more potent, volatile and easily transmissible, having been developed for chemical warfare.[10] Emergency departments should adhere to universal guidelines for HAZMAT incidents, which include decontamination protocols, adequate PPE training and supplies, and maintenance of an adequate supply of antidotes. Specifically, frontline staff, including paramedics, should be educated on the routes and risks of secondary exposure to various HAZMAT agents, the appropriate PPE and steps to minimise their own risks of exposure. Decontamination of the index patient should also be prioritised, not only for the patient’s benefit but also to safeguard both the physical and psychological well-being of HCWs and to prevent unnecessary staff attrition during incidents.[2] HAZMAT decontamination stations should also be an integral part of the infrastructure of all EDs.[18] Institutional protocols should aim at protecting staff from any toxic encounter. However, when the agent involved is known to have minimal toxicity, there is a potential to reduce protective gears at the discretion of a knowledgeable team leader, preferably after consultation with a toxicologist. The rationale for the deviation from protocol should be communicated to staff and documented in the clinical notes accordingly.

This incident highlights the importance of risk stratifying secondary exposure victims. In the event of a mass chemical incident, appropriate risk assessment and right-siting of patients will have significant downstream effects in maintaining a balance between safe discharge and reducing admissions, so that the healthcare system is not overwhelmed. Patients deemed at low risk based on clinical history and physical examination may be discharged. Those deemed at moderate risk based on clinical symptoms and likely dermal and inhalational exposure can be managed in the ED observation ward for short-term care. High-risk patients presenting with cholinergic toxidrome after confirmed contact with the index case without proper PPE would require inpatient admission and administration of antidotes.

The limitations of this study include its retrospective nature and the small number of HCWs involved. Most of the elicited timelines are based on first-hand recall of the incident. This account only provides insight on the effects of a single OP agent (malathion)and cannot be generalised. Furthermore, the contribution of psychological stress reaction was not evaluated in this incident.

In conclusion, secondary exposure to certain OP-containing pesticides like malathion through dermal and inhalational routes may not be as dangerous as suggested in some literature. None of the exposed staff developed symptoms or had cholinesterase levels suggestive of acute poisoning. Although mild OP poisoning could be a possibility, the symptoms experienced were more likely due to inhalation of the volatile hydrocarbon vehicle, the effects of donning a HAZMAT suit or psychological stress reactions from being exposed to a perceived toxic agent. However, it is still prudent to exercise universal precautions when dealing with any chemical incidents and perform early decontamination to reduce staff attrition resulting from other factors.

== Conflicts of interest ==

There are no conflicts of interest.