== ARTICLE TITLE ==
Acute fipronil toxicity in humans following intentional ingestion: a case report with favorable outcome from a resource-limited setting

== ABSTRACT ==
BackgroundFipronil is N-phenylpyrazole insecticide which acts by inhibiting gamma‑aminobutyric acid type A gated chloride channels resulting in hyperexcitability of neurons. While its more selective for insect receptors, it can cause toxicity in humans if ingested. Only few literatures are available on this insecticide poisoning leading to adverse clinical presentation.Case presentationwe report the case of 35-year-old female who presented with vomiting and abdominal pain following deliberate ingestion of Fipronil. Upon presentation, the patient was fully conscious with blood pressure and heart rate within normal range. There was no sign of skin irritation, seizure, or neurologic deficit. Laboratory investigations including hemogram, renal function, liver function and electrolyte are within normal limit. The patient received supportive management and was discharged after two days of observation with favourable outcome.ConclusionFipronil poisoning is often asymptomatic; however, when symptoms occur, they primarily include vomiting, nausea, and seizures. The outcome is favourable. The mainstay of treatment is supportive treatment and seizure control. Given the availability of limited data, gastric lavage is not highly recommended.

== Background ==

Fipronil is N-phenylpyrazole insecticide which acts by inhibiting gamma‑aminobutyric acid type A gated chloride channels resulting in hyperexcitability of neurons. While its more selective for insect receptors, it can cause toxicity in humans if ingested. Only few literatures are available on this insecticide poisoning leading to adverse clinical presentation.

== Case presentation ==

we report the case of 35-year-old female who presented with vomiting and abdominal pain following deliberate ingestion of Fipronil. Upon presentation, the patient was fully conscious with blood pressure and heart rate within normal range. There was no sign of skin irritation, seizure, or neurologic deficit. Laboratory investigations including hemogram, renal function, liver function and electrolyte are within normal limit. The patient received supportive management and was discharged after two days of observation with favourable outcome.

== Conclusion ==

Fipronil poisoning is often asymptomatic; however, when symptoms occur, they primarily include vomiting, nausea, and seizures. The outcome is favourable. The mainstay of treatment is supportive treatment and seizure control. Given the availability of limited data, gastric lavage is not highly recommended.

== Introduction ==

Globally, deliberate self-poisoning using insecticides has become a major public health concern, with death tolls reaching 300,000 in Asia pacific region each year [1]. Driven by the concern for human toxicity and increasing insect resistance to organophosphorus and organochloride insecticides, new generation of insecticides such as fipronil was introduced to the market in the 1990s [1].

Fipronil, the first phenylpyrazol introduced, is used to control insects like cockroaches, mosquitos, locusts, and fleas in their larval and adult stage. It works by blocking gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) gated chloride channels resulting in excessive neuronal hyperexcitability. The GABA receptor consists of a central chloride pore assembled from five transmembrane subunits. Each subunits have three domains: the extracellular domain, transmembrane domain (transmembrane 1–4) and cytoplasmic loop. Fipronil is noncompetitive inhibitor that binds to TM2 domain, resulting in interruption of channel gating rather than directly blocking the chloride pore [2]. fipronil has higher affinity for the GABA regulated chloride channels of insects than for mammalian receptors [1, 3, 4]. Compared to other GABA receptor binding pesticides available, it is the most specific to native insect receptors over their mammalian counterparts [1].

Fipronil is considered a moderately hazardous substance and is classified by the WHO as class II pesticides [5]. According to reports from CDC, acute illnesses related to fipronil are uncommon, with the majority being occupational exposures. The non occupational exposure cases remain underreported and frequently overlooked [6].

Medical literature regarding fipronil toxicity in sub–Saharan African remain scarce. Regardless of its common use in rural Ethiopia, reports on fipronil poisoning, whether occupational or non-occupational, are limited. In addition to the lack of local literature, limited access to toxicology laboratories and specialised personnel pose significant challenge to the management of fipronil poisoning in resource limited settings. Here we present a case of acute fipronil poisoning manifesting as acute gastritis and discuss its management within resource limited area.

== Case presentation ==

A 35-year-old female weighing 60 kg present to the emergency department with an alleged history of deliberate ingestion of 50 ml of 50% fipronil liquid solution (~ 417.6 mg/kg). The patient’s family provided the container for confirmation (Fig. 1).


Fig. 1Fipronil solution ingested by the patient (Gondar, 2025) Photograph provided by the patient’s family


The patient ingested the solution 3 h prior to her presentation following domestic argument. Within the first 2 h after the ingestion, she had 3 episodes of vomiting of foul-smelling liquid matter, and epigastric pain. The patient reported no abnormal body movement or change in mentation. On examination, she was conscious, pulse rate was 96 regular, blood pressure 110/70, and 98% oxygen saturation. Neurologic examination revealed a Glasgow coma scale score of 15/15, with mid-sized and reactive pupils. Motor strength was 5/5 on all extremities, sensation was intact, deep tendon reflexes were normal. There was no clonus, flaccidity or rigidity. The patient’s hemogram, liver function, renal function and electrolytes were all in normal limits. A toxicology screen panel, blood fipronil or fipronil sulphone levels, and 12 led ECG was not available. She was treated with proton pump inhibitor and was monitored for seizure throughout her hospitalization. Psychiatric counselling was obtained. Following 48 h of observation, she was discharged in stable condition with favourable outcome.

== Discussion ==

Fipronil is a new generation insecticide with a trifluoromethylsulfonyl moiety. It is primarily used in seed treatments, topical pet care products, agriculture specifically to control locusts, grasshoppers, fleas, ticks, ants, and other insects on crops. It prevents the passage of chloride ions through GABA gated chloride channels. Fipronil exhibits 150–2000 times higher selectivity for insect GABA receptors than mammalian receptors. It selectively binds to the GABA-A receptor but not GABA-C receptor contributing to its selectivity to insects over mammals. Furthermore, fipronil blocks neuronal glutamate gated chloride channels which are found in invertebrates [1, 3–7]. Through these mechanisms, fipronil induces hyperexcitability of neurons. It can also cause uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation within the mitochondrial complex leading to ischemia, and hypoxia of vital organs [8].

Fipronil’s lower affinity for mammalian receptors makes it safer for use as an insecticide. It has a relatively higher lethal dose 50% (LD50) in mammals such as mice and rats at 95 mg/kg and 97 mg/kg respectively. In contrast, it has significantly lower LD50 in insects like honeybee which is less than 5 ng/bee [3, 9]. According to the national pesticide information centre, the lowest observed adverse effect level on rats (LOAEL) was 7.5 mg/kg while the no adverse effect level was 2.5 mg/kg [9].Fipronil’s active metabolites (fipronil sulfide, fipronil desulfinyl, and fipronil sulfone) exhibit activity at mammalian receptors. Fipronil sulfone is twenty times more active at mammalian receptors than at insect receptors with an elimination half-life of 208 h following oral administration [9, 10]. Furthermore, Fipronil disulfonyl is 9–10 times more active at mammalian receptor than its parent compound [5, 7]. Acute fipronil poisoning in rodents is characterized by tremor, movement and gait abnormalities, seizure and mortality at doses exceeding 50 mg/kg [11].

According to surveillance done from the USA, individuals exposed to fipronil mostly present with mild symptoms or remain asymptomatic. When symptoms do occur, they are primarily neurologic which include headache, confusion, paraesthesia, weakness and confusion. Moreover, the patients may present with mild ocular, dermatologic, gastrointestinal, respiratory, or cardiovascular symptoms [6]. However, a limited number of case reports indicate that fipronil poisoning can have a severe presentation. A case series from Sri Lanka in 2004 reported 8 cases of fipronil ingestion. seven of these patients had gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting and epigastric pain, while three developed tonic clonic seizure. Seven patients were eventually discharged with favourable outcome. However, one patient who presented with loss of consciousness and abnormal body movement required intubation and admission to ICU. After 17 days of ICU stay, the patient developed pneumonia and ultimately died [1]. To date, this case remains the only death associated with fipronil poisoning reported on literatures. However most recent literatures indicate fipronil toxicity can lead to variety of complications. These include rhabdomyolysis, status epilepticus, sinus bradycardia, mild to severe hepatotoxicity, and acute kidney injury [6–8, 11].

In the absence of antidote, the sign and symptoms of fipronil poisoning are managed primarily through supportive care. Appropriate and timely intervention can lead to favourable outcome [12]. There are limited data regarding the usage and efficacy of activated charcoal and gastric lavage. However, the relatively low toxicity of fipronil, combined with the limited effectiveness of gastric lavage and induced emesis for liquid ingestions, generally discourages the use of these decontamination methods.

Our patient presented with mild gastrointestinal symptoms, specifically vomiting and epigastric pain. The diagnosis was established based on the clinical presentation and medical history, which was confirmed after the patient’s family provided a photograph of the fipronil canister. The serum levels of serum fipronil and its metabolites couldn’t be determined as toxicology laboratories and poison control centres were available. Given the limited data regarding gastric lavage for fipronil poisoning and the unavailability of activated charcoal, gastrointestinal decontamination was not performed. Considering the significant dose ingested (417 mg/kg), the patient was closely monitored for seizure and other neurological symptoms. Despite the high estimated intake, a review of existing literature on fipronil poisoning reveal no specific dose-symptom correlation in humans. The patient experienced three episodes of vomiting immediately following ingestion, which likely significantly reduced the amount of toxin available in the gastrointestinal tract for systemic absorption. Following supportive care and period of close observation, the patient remained asymptomatic and was discharged with favourable outcome. She continued her remote follow up at nearby health centre and remained asymptomatic during follow up.

In Gondar, where the patient resides, there are currently no regulations governing the household use of fipronil. It is readily available as an over-the-counter insecticide and is often used without adequate safety precautions. Furthermore, there is a significant lack of public awareness regarding the potential toxicological dangers of fipronil exposure. For a better management of similar cases, it’s recommended to establish appropriate laboratories and train specific personnel.

== Conclusion ==

Fipronil which is used in agricultural setting when ingested mainly result in mild gastrointestinal, neurological, ocular, cardiovascular and dermatologic symptoms. In severe presentation, it may cause seizure, renal and hepatotoxicity, rhabdomyolysis, and death. Its mainstay of management is only supportive, and no antidote is yet present.