== ARTICLE TITLE ==
Rare fatal poisoning through dermal exposure to
paraquat

== ABSTRACT ==
Paraquat skin contact occurs less frequently and is rarely fatal. This article
reports a case of a 45-year-old man who presented with dysphagia, respiratory
distress and grade two, and third skin burns focusing on the upper body after
accidental exposure to paraquat. He was admitted to the hospital 6 days after
the first contact. The urine sodium dithionate test was strongly positive. The
O2 saturation at admission was 52%, which reached 91% with a bag
valve mask. Rising blood liver enzymes, urea, creatinine, and respiratory
acidosis in the venous blood gas analysis were observed in the lab data. In the
course of hospitalization, the patient was intubated due to oxygen level
dropping. Evidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome and decreased level of
consciousness was also observed. However, despite treatment with
corticosteroids, antioxidants, and hemodialysis, he died on the fourth day of
hospitalization. It is concluded that dermal exposure with paraquat could be
life-threatening if the patient presented late with organ involvement.

== Introduction ==

Paraquat (PQ) is a nonselective herbicide used worldwide in agriculture.1 It was also
consumed broadly as pesticides for agricultural purposes.1,2 Due to its low cost and high
efficiency, it is still widely utilized in many countries, especially in Asian and
developing countries, and approximately, people are poisoned by about 2000
annually.3,4
PQ has a high toxicity and mortality rate, in adults causes death of about 3–6 g of
it.3

PQ causes poisoning in humans mainly through oral contact (often with suicidal
ideation), inhalation, and dermal contact (primarily occupational) occurs less
frequently and is rarely fatal.1,5 The distribution of PQ occurs
in components with high blood flow; indeed, the concentration of PQ in the lungs is
20 to 30 times that of plasma, and the most common cause of death is respiratory
failure and pulmonary fibrosis.3

Although severe cases of PQ poisoning occur after ingestion,1 however, there
are also reports of systemic involvement after skin exposure to PQ.1,6–8 This study also reports a case
of severe systemic involvement and death after dermal exposure.

== Case report ==

A 45-year-old farmer with a body mass index = 22.1 (BMI = weight
(kg)/height2 (m)) who was referred to the poisoning emergency center of
Khorshid Hospital affiliated to Isfahan University of Medical Sciences about 6 days
after the skin exposure through accidental spraying PQ 20% solution on his face and
body. He suffered from dysphagia, two episodes of hemoptysis containing clear blood
clots, and respiratory distress which was started 3 days after exposure. All of the
history related to the patient was obtained from his mother.

At admission, vital signs were axillary temperature, 36.7°C; heart rate, 107/min;
respiratory rate, 30/min; blood pressure, 111/50 mm Hg; and O2
saturation, 52% which reached 91% with a bag valve mask. On initial physical
examination, the patient was confused and he had second- and third-degree burns and
multiple ulcers focusing on the body (face and around and in the mouth, forehead,
neck, shoulders and axillary, elbows, trunk, hands, and feet) with yellow and green
serous discharge. There was an ulcer and erosion in the oral cavity as well.

In first visit, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) recorded by physician in medical
record.9 Physical examination of the lungs showed a decrease in the sound
of the left lung. The volume of urine was reduced and changed to brown. In addition,
the urine sodium dithionate test for PQ on the first day at admission was strongly
positive and defined as purple-colored urine. In his past medical history, the
patient had a history of addiction to methadone and opium inhalation.

Based on the local protocol for PQ management, for those patients who present late
after exposure, the gastrointestinal endoscopy is not performed. In the initial
tests of the patient, an increase in blood liver enzymes, urea, creatinine, as well
as respiratory acidosis in the venous blood gas analysis was seen. Table 1 shows the
patient’s laboratory tests patient during 4 days of hospitalization in the intensive
care unit (ICU).

Three hours after admission to the emergency room, O2 saturation without
oxygen was 30% and after receiving oxygen with bag valve mask, it reached 60%. At
this time, the patient was intubated and transferred to the ICU. Dialysis access was
placed in the left femoral vein.

The patient was treated with fluid hydration, oxygen supplement, antioxidants
including Vitamin E 300 units daily for 2 days (Osvah Pharmaceutical Company,
Tehran, Iran) intramuscular, Vitamin C 2 g intravenous (IV) infusion, and then
150 mg/h daily infusion for 2 days (Daroupakhsh Pharmaceutical Company, Tehran,
Iran), methylprednisolone 1 g IV infusion on the first day and then 500 mg daily
infusion (for 3 days) (Jaber Pharmaceutical Company, Tehran, Iran), and
N-acetylcysteine 300 mg/kg/day IV infusion for 1 day (Aurum Pharmaceuticals Limited,
Romford Essex, England). After consultation regarding body burns, tetracycline skin
ointment was given daily. He underwent hemodialysis two times, 8 h each time (the
first and third day of hospitalization) due to a positive dithionite test and renal
failure. On the third day of hospitalization, potassium chloride 15% was prescribed
due to reported hypokalemia.

High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) and chest X-rays (CXRs) of the patient
were reported in Figure 1.
In the HRCT, alveolar opacity by air bronchograms of both lungs with evidence of
acute respiratory syndrome was seen. In addition, increased lung opacity was defined
in the CXR report.

The level of patients’ consciousness decreased 16 h after admission with GCS 4/15 (no
eye contact and no response to painful stimulation and intubation). On the fourth
day of hospitalization, the patient gradually developed sinus bradycardia, with
O2 saturation of 35%–40% with FIO2 of 100%. Finally, the
cardio-respiratory arrest occurred, and the patient died despite cardiopulmonary
resuscitation.

== Discussion ==

PQ is a highly toxic compound and has a high mortality rate in poisoning due to the
lack of a specific antidote.4 Although severe cases of poisoning are usually the result of
ingestion;1 however, one of the most important routes of exposure is
dermal.6

In our case, PQ poisoning was confirmed by positive urine sodium dithionate test. As
the absorption of PQ from the skin is low and takes time, the urine sodium
dithionate test may become positive even after several days based on exposure
amount.

The patient had second- and third-degree burns and multiple ulcers focusing on his
body due to PQ spraying. Different people have diverse cutaneous reactions to
accidental contact with PQ; some do not react to PQ, or only local lesions on the
skin and nails without systemic involvement.1 Hoffer and Taitelman10 reported that
accidentally exposure through skin and eye in 15 patients during PQ spraying,
resulted in only local lesions due to a single contact without systemic involvement.
In addition, in the study of Castro-Gutiérrez et al.,11 only 53% of farmers had skin
rashes or burns after 2 years of chronic contact with sprayers of toxin.

However, dermal contact with this toxin causes severe systemic reactions and death.
The first death from PQ dermal absorption was reported in 1974, followed by at least
11 fatalities and 2 nonfatal cases of systemic poisoning via a dermal
route.12 Various factors contribute to the spreading of toxicity,
including inter-individual variability, an increase in the percentage of the body
surface exposed to the herbicide,13 and the presence of injury
and skin lesions before exposure to the toxin.6,14 Finally, the lack of timely
washing of the body,1,6,15 inappropriate
protective equipment, and delay in primary treatment management may be responsible
for more severe intoxication.6,16

In this case, the report was observed: some of factors that contribute to progression
severity such as lack of protective equipment during working and do not wash the
body in the early hours of contact with a toxin, and finally, late referral for
treatment (6 days after the initial contact with the toxin).

However, this point should be considered that the focus of the lesions was more on
the upper body and axillary in the mentioned case, whereas the perineal and axillary
skin has smaller and more fragile blood vessels that could be contributed to greater
absorption during PQ exposure.4 Moreover, pulmonary
insufficiency, hypoxia, and kidney failure with strongly positive urine sodium
dithionate test could be the factors that caused the patient’s death.

There are some limitations in this report. Our patient had also dysphagia which may
be due to entering the PQ into the mouth through ‎the accidental spraying PQ 20%
solution on his face. We could not rule out gastrointestinal injury as ‎endoscopy
was not performed for the patient based on local protocol as the time elapsed from
exposure was 6 days.

Although our patient had respiratory distress, as he did not show other symptoms of
COVID-‎‎19, we did not perform the test for possible COVID involvement, which was
not also available at that time in our hospital. Many ulcers focusing on his body
(face and around the mouth, forehead, neck, shoulders and axillary, elbows, hands,
and feet) induced by PQ enhance its more absorption and could explain systematic
sign and respiratory distress. Also, the volume of PQ was sprayed into the face and
body of the patient had not mentioned in the medical record of the patient which may
be another limitation of the study to explain the amount of exposure.

== Conclusion ==

In conclusion, dermal exposure to PQ can be fatal, especially when accompanied by
significant delays in starting treatment and involving respiratory and renal
systems. The exact effectiveness of current medical management in PQ poisoning is
controversial. Therefore, it is very important for emergency physicians to suspect
PQ poisoning when facing chemical burns and skin lesions, particularly when the skin
lesions are associated with systemic symptoms, and to investigate the possibility of
poisoning. Considering immediate removal of poison from the skin, hair, and nail
contamination, assessment of the severity of skin damage and treatment of burns, and
assessment of the risk of systemic absorption (evaluation of lung, kidney, and liver
function factors) are important factors. They should use protective equipment when
working with PQ, and in case of initial contact of the body with the poison, after
rapid body washing with soap and water, they should refer the patient to the
relevant medical centers for further investigation.